# A cryptographic perspective on token security

There's plenty of criticisms of JWTs[^jwt_issues]. It is well established that they can have security drawbacks if you're using them wrong. Instead of repeating those perspectives here, I will argue that JWTs aren't significantly more secure than basic id tokens. To do this I will loosely define 3 systems for authentication and evaluate how they break for attackers with different capabilities.

Imagine you have a system with a client, who has to prove that they are authorized to access this system, and a server who has to validate that this is the case.[^authorization] Initially, a client will authenticate using a username and password combination, 2FA, a hardware token, or something akin to this, and after doing this initial authentication you don't want to have to do it on every request. The classic way to solve this is to hand out id tokens (aka session ids, random nonce), but modern technologies like JWTs are also being used to solve this problem.
It's usually not explictly claimed that JWTs are more secure than session tokens, but developers can end up assuming this, which isn't the case.

[^jwt_issues]: [API Tokens: A Tedious Survey](https://fly.io/blog/api-tokens-a-tedious-survey/) by Thomas Ptacek is a really good article about tokens in general, he is also one of the hosts of Security Cryptography Whatever which has some [good](https://securitycryptographywhatever.com/2022/01/29/biscuits-with-geoffroy-couprie/) [episodes](https://securitycryptographywhatever.com/2021/08/12/what-do-we-do-about-jwt-with-jonathan-rudenberg/) on this topic.

[^authorization]: Often you want to differentiate what parts of the system an authenticated user is allowed to access. For example, in an email system Alice shouldn't be able to read Bob's emails even if they both use the same provider. This is not the topic of this blog post, and is a different and connected problem often referred to as "authorization". I'm only discussing authentication.

## Session identifiers
What I mean by "id token" is a randomly generated identifier that can be sent as proof of prior authentication. These ids are generated from a secure source, such as a cryptographically secure pseudo random number generator (CSPRNG) seeded with hardware randomness.[^csprng]
You also have some type of key-value store, either in memory or in a database, where you map ids to sessions and store information about the session. Information like what user is logged in, when they authenticated and from what geographic region. This allows you to easily revoke sessions as quickly as you can remove items from your key-value store. You can choose to make ids as large as you want, but a reasonable size might be 128 bits or 16 bytes.

[^csprng]: This is the case in [PHP](https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/0fe3a91494e9aece3ae948cf9bf9d3476686e0a5/ext/session/session.c#L364) for example.

From an attacker's perspective there isn't much flexibility. You can try guessing other user's id tokens, but that would take around $`2^{128}`$ requests to authenticate as that user. If you just want to authenticate as any user, it will take $`2^{128} / sessions`$ requests to guess a valid token, if we assume less than 8 billion sessions ($`\approx 2^{33}`$) it would take $`2^{95}`$ requests. It is not possible to send even close to that many requests so that attack isn't feasible. Collisions can occur at roughly $`\sqrt{2^{128}}=2^{64}`$ authentications, which is to say we would expect that a user would override a different users existing session if $`2^{64}`$ users logged in at the same time. This is roughly 2.3 billion times earth's population. If you used 50 bytes per session you would need around 1 zetabyte of storage. Your servers would die long before you reach this. If you want to safeguard against this anyway, creating new sessions should fail if the new token id would override an existing token id in your key-value store.

In other words, you can't authenticate as other users by messing with session ids. Numbers around $`2^{128}`$ are too big to be brute-forced, and numbers around $`2^{64}`$ are too big to be brute-forced over the network or exhausted in memory.

If we imagine a more powerful attacker that can read some data from the backend, we can have actual attacks. Let's say an attacker can read ~100 bytes from the system.[^reading_bytes] The trivial attack is reading 100 bytes of whatever secret information we're storing server side, like a name or part of a message.
To increase their capabilities, they could read a few session ids from the key-value store and authenticate as some user, and thereafter read significantly more data. They could read the inner state of our CSPRNG, and predict the next however many tokens we hand out until the CSPRNG is re-seeded from hardware. This would let them authenticate as potentially a very high amount of users, depending on how often re-seeding happens. When authenticated they could also modify data, thereby turning the read capability into a limited write capability. Of course getting to read 100 bytes of arbitrary data from a system is a strong capability that we don't expect attackers to easily posses, but it is worth evaluating the failure-modes of a security system.

[^reading_bytes]: Why I am choosing this model of reading ~100 chosen bytes of data? What I'm trying to do here is bring the idea of security games from cryptography into web security. Borrowing security games from cryptography and bringing them into other parts of security is something I'm borrowing from [research](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=8226852). The idea is that if our system is secure or at least resistant despite an attacker having a strong capability, it will be a more secure system than if it immediately falls apart. I'm trying to choose a weak capability, and usually reading data is the weakest in the read, write and execute hierarchy. 100 bytes of arbitrary read is a lot, a weaker capability might be reading random data. This was the case for [heartbleed](https://heartbleed.com/), a web vulnerability affecting a significant percentage of the internet. I went with chosen data instead of random because it makes the arguments simpler, and chosen data is just random data with a bit of luck (or enough retries).

## JWTs (or some other signed token)
JWTs are more complex, but let's focus on a simple case. We use "HS256", which is HMAC SHA-256, and store a user id and the time of token creation in the payload. 
```js
base64({
  "alg": "HS256",
  "typ": "JWT"
}) + "." + base64({
  "sub": user_id,
  "iat": current_time()
}) // And then we have to append a signature/MAC/tag
```
In order to revoke this token, we have to wait until it expires, which is a configurable amount of time. If we set it too high, revocation can be exceedingly slow. If we want to revoke tokens without waiting, there's a lot of ways to solve that[^revocation] but I won't get into it here, it's enough to note that this is an undesirable security implication. When we receive a correctly signed token, we honor the request according to that user's permissions.

[^revocation]: There are some articles about revocation strategies, like "[A walk with JWT and security (II): JWT revocation strategies](https://waiting-for-dev.github.io/blog/2017/01/24/jwt_revocation_strategies)", but mostly it boils down to revoking every token or storing some revocation list or some unique identifier in a database, and then doing another query. You have to do it for every request because you can't know before-hand if a token is revoked, so you end up having this hybrid authentication scheme and you lose some of the benefits of JWTs.

The previous attacks of brute-force still apply, and are equally ineffective. The first 2 parts of the base64 triple are base64 encoded JSON data, which we can craft to be whatever we want. The last part is a signature (or in our case it is actually a tag, because it is using symmetric cryptography) which is 256 bits. Guessing this tag would take $`2^{256}`$ requests, which is not feasible. Collision attacks cannot occur because the token contains the user id, so even if two tags collide (which would take $`2^{128}`$ sessions, and also be the first ever SHA256 collision. Basically this will never happen.) they will still each authenticate to the users listed in the token.

Since this construction has more complexity, attackers inherently have more flexibility and there is a larger attack surface. If there was some forgery attack on HMAC-SHA256, this would leave our token scheme vulnerable, although this is very unlikely to happen. Even HMAC-MD5 is unbroken, despite MD5 being broken in may ways.[^HMAC-MD5]

[^HMAC-MD5]: The IETF say "The attacks on HMAC-MD5 do not seem to indicate a practical vulnerability when used as a message authentication code" in [RFC6151](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6151). There is a [security proof](https://eprint.iacr.org/2006/043.pdf) for HMAC that only relies on the pseudo-randomness of the hash function and not collision resistance.

Depending on how the tokens are constructed you can have ambiguous payloads like `{"sub":"user", "sub":"admin"}` which can result in exploits if your parsers don't parse the data in the same way[^parser_differentials]. This is called parser differentials, and is a studied bug-class. I am not aware of any CVEs for JWT libraries that stem from parser differentials, but parser differentials in authentication code often become security vulnerabilities. If the header says `{"alg":"none"}` some implementations will skip signature validation.[^alg_none] Reasonable implementations will not suffer from these issues, but it is inherent to the increased complexity that there are more things that can go wrong. The fewer parsers you have in your authentication path, the fewer chances you have for parser bugs.

[^parser_differentials]: In this specific case, the idea is that the signing part of the system will read this payload and interpret `sub = "user"`, sign this without re-encoding, and another will read the signed payload and interpret `sub = "admin"`, thereby letting an attacker authenticate as an admin. This is just one example of how parser differentials manifest as security bugs. See example 11 in [A Survey of Parser Differential Anti-Patterns](https://langsec.org/spw23/papers/Ali_LangSec23.pdf) or [An Exploration of JSON Interoperability Vulnerabilities](https://bishopfox.com/blog/json-interoperability-vulnerabilities) for more ways JSON parsers can introduce security vulnerabilities.
[^alg_none]: There are [multiple](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/cve-2022-23540) [CVEs](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2020-15957) [handed](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2021-44878) out for this issue, but it is part of the specification, so you can argue that it's not a bug but a feature. It is at the very least a poor default to permit `{"alg":"none"}`.

If we again assume an attacker can read ~100 bytes from the system, we can see that the impact is increased. The attacker can read the secret symmetric key from the server, and then sign as many sessions as wanted. This compromises every user, even users who have no active sessions and who will never log in again. The key is more sensitive than the inner state of the CSPRNG or even every single session id in the key-store. It is equivalent to every piece of private data accessible by every user. In the real world, you would probably struggle to extract all of that data, but you could pick any data you wanted and extract that. You could also modify any data owned by any user. Overall, this is an unfortunate failure mode.

## What about both?
Intuitively, you would think that signing[^ackshually] your session ids using HMAC should be more secure than just using session ids. Under most security models, this isn't the case. Assuming an attacker has no capability in your system, then session ids, signed tokens and signed session ids are all secure. Assuming an attacker can read ~100 bytes, they can still mount the same attacks that we see on the system with just session ids and no signing.

[^ackshually]: It's called tagging when it's symmetric instead of signing, but commonly enginners call it signing.

They can read 100 bytes of secret data, they can read some session tokens and the symmetric key to construct a small amount of valid tokens and they can read the CSPRNG state and symmetric key to generate valid future tokens. This is the exact same impact as just using session ids, but with added complexity. There are security models where signing does give you a security benefit. If gaining access to session ids and gaining access to keys are decoupled, it requires more from an attacker. It can be a mitigation, if you're building your system to achieve that.

JWTs can seem like they provide additional security over session ids because of their use of cryptography. I hope you can see this isn't the case, and in fact the cryptography can introduce a new single point of failure. I do not believe that JWTs are insecure or that session ids should always be used instead, but we should be wary of the extra complexity they introduce both in terms of development cost and security.
